feat: add security bulletin for MD5 to SCRAM migration | STORY-112 (#2515)
Scalingo/documentation: src/_posts/security/bulletins/2024-03-13-SSB-2024-002.md

To help you identify the connection method used when establishing a connection to your database, we have made this information visible in our API and CLI. For more information, [please consult our documentation].

## I would like to apply this change faster for my HDH apps add-ons

If your HDH application is already fully compatible with SCRAM-SHA-256 and you wish to apply this security enhancement without waiting for 6 months, please contact our support team by chat or e-mail. Provide us the names of the databases you wish to update and we will do the rest!

## Final words

The migration from MD5 to SCRAM is a necessary security enhancement. SCRAM is a more secure and modern authentication method that provides better protection against several types of attacks, including brute force and rainbow table attacks. This change is in line with industry best practices and recommendations for database security.

Scalingo is committed to maintaining the highest standards of security and service for our customers. We appreciate your cooperation and understanding in this important security enhancement.

> 

Author: Good idea, I wrote something

> 
> 
> This is the most secure of the currently provided methods, but it is not supported by older client libraries.

This is a per-database-user change. It implies resetting the users' passwords (since PostgreSQL doesn't know them).

## Timeline of the rollout

There are 2 distinct timelines, depending on the type of the parent application of the PostgreSQL add-on.

- **Health Data Hosting databases (HDH):** for PostgreSQL add-ons linked to HDH applications, this update is scheduled for $MIGRATION_START_DATE+6_MONTHS (in 6 months' time). This notice is due to the nature of the data contained in these databases and the excessive caution they require.
- **Other databases:** this change will be applied automatically **in the coming weeks**.

You will be notified by e-mail 24 hours before the start of the maintenance period of the affected add-on(s), according to the database maintenance window configuration.

## Impact on your applications

> Rest assured, this transition is designed to have minimal impact on your applications (less than a second). The SCRAM-SHA-256 algorithm is widely supported by PostgreSQL clients library and has been in use for several years.

Reviewer: Are all the current sessions closed? Is the application to be restarted?

Author: Connections will not close, no restart needed.

To ensure a smooth transition, we kindly request you to verify that your PostgreSQL client version supports the SCRAM-SHA-256 algorithm. You can refer to the [PostgreSQL Wiki](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/List_of_drivers) for the list of compatible client library versions.

## Application of this change

As PostgreSQL stores only a *hash* of the password, changing the hashing algorithm implies that we provide the original password again to the database. This is only possible for users that are managed by Scalingo (the *protected* users in your database dashboard).

### Protected users

Protected users are credentials created automatically by Scalingo to allow applications to connect to databases.

![Database users panel with a protected user](https://cdn.scalingo.com/documentation/security/20240313_database_users_panel_protected_user.png)

> As we know the passwords for these users, we will be able to update the passwords automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we manage the passwords for these users, we will be able to update the passwords automatically.
```

All protected users in your PostgreSQL databases hosted on Scalingo will automatically be migrated to use SCRAM authentication.

### Unmanaged users

> Unmanaged users of your database **won't be migrated** as we don't know their passwords.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unmanaged users of your database **won't be migrated** as we don't have their passwords.
```

> Unmanaged users of your database **won't be migrated** as we don't have their passwords.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unmanaged users of your database **won't be migrated** as we don't have their passwords.
There is no difference between users created via the CLI or the database dashboard.
```

{% note %}
  Not migrating these users will not affect your database operations, but it will reduce your level of security.
{% endnote %}

> If you have created users, either via the CLI or via the database dashboard is the same.

Reviewer: What do you want to say?

Author: Well, actually I just copy pasted what you wrote on January 16th. What would better express what you thought about?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Once you have been notified that your database has been migrated. 

Reviewer: What do you want to say?

Author: Same here, that's what you wrote on January 16th. Would you like to rephrase?

> Once you have been notified that your database has been migrated. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have been notified that your database has been migrated and your application is running successfully, you can migrate your unmanaged users
```

> You can list users of your database and see their current authentication method with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can list the users of your database and see their current authentication method with the following command:
```

```bash
scalingo --app my-app --addon <addon uuid> database-users-list
```

> For each **manually created user** using MD5 authentication method, run the following command. A prompt will ask for your password, you can either re-enter the current one you have been using or update it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each **manually created user** using MD5 authentication method, run the following command. A prompt will ask for your password, you can either re-enter the current one or update it to a new value:
```

```bash
scalingo --app my-app --addon <addon uuid> database-user-update-password <username>
```

## How can I be sure that my application is compatible with SCRAM-SHA-256?

> The best way to check this change, without affecting your application, is to create a new app with the same source code and add a new PostgreSQL add-on. You can then import some sample data and confirm the compatibility with your client library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best way to test this change without affecting your application is to create a new app with the same source code and add a new PostgreSQL add-on. You can then import some sample data and check the compatibility with your client library.
```
